# SQL Basics

## Setup

### What do i need open?

- You will need to open pgAdmin4, and if you have it, open the Pagila database. Otherwise, the file can be foung in the SQL Setup lesson
- Open .SQL_Basics.key to show the ERD of the Pagila database
- OBS
    

### What recording scenes do I need open?

- Screencapture of pgAdmin4 with your webcam capture in the corner
- Webcam capture in full screen


## Script

- __`[START SCENE] webcam in full screen`__
    - SQL is a domain-specific language that is used to manage data in a relational database management system.
    - A domain-specific language is a language that is specific to a particular domain, and in this case, that particular domain is the database management
    - In fact, for many people, SQL stands for Structured Query Language, since you are making queries to the structured database
    - So, we are mentioning the concept of Relational DataBase Management System, or RDBMS, but, what is a Relational Database?
        - A relational database is a database that stores data in a structured way.
        - This structure is based on the idea of having the data organized as relations between tables.

- Let's take a look at the following example extracted from the Pagila database:

<br>

- __`[CHANGE SCENE] Open Keynote - .SQL_BASICS.KEY`__
    - This image shows a small piece of the ERD of the Pagila database
    - ERD stands for Entity Relationship Diagram, and it is a diagram that shows the relationships between the tables in the database
    - We won't go into the details of what each element in the ERD represents, but bare in mind that the arrows from one table to another represent where some data is stored
    - So, in this example, we have three tables, "Customer", "Store", and "Address"
    - Within each table, we have a few columns, and there is a specific one that is marked as the primary key (PK)
    - The PK is the column that is used to uniquely identify each row in the table
    - Now, we can see that the "Customer" table two more columns, "Store ID" and "Address ID", representing the store in which the customer is registered and the address where the customer lives respectively
    - Notice that the "Store" table has a column named "Store ID", which is the same one that we found in the "Customer" table
    - And in the "Address" table, we have a column named "Address ID", which is the same one that we found in the "Customer" table
    - So, we can make relationships between customers, stores and addresses using these columns.
    - When a column in a table is the primary key in another table, it is called a foreign key
    - So, in this example, the "Store ID" column in the "Customer" table is a foreign key, but the "Store ID" column in the "Store" table is not a foreign key, but a primary key
    - One note on primary keys and foreign keys: 
        - Primary keys are unique, and they are used to uniquely identify each row in the table, usually they are represented with the ID
        - Foreign keys are not necessarily unique, for example, a single customer can be registered in multiple stores
        - This introduces the concept of cardinality, which is the number of occurrences in a table that are related to another table
        - This relationship can be One-to-One, One-to-Many, or Many-to-Many
        - For example, each store can have only one location, so the tables "Store" and "Address" have a One-to-One relationship
        - But, each customer can be registered in multiple stores, so the tables "Customer" and "Store" have a One-to-Many relationship

<br>

- __`[NEXT SLIDE]`__
    - The Many-to-Many relationship is a bit more complicated, but it is a relationship that allows for multiple occurrences of a row in one table to be related to multiple rows in another table
    - It happens when a table has a column that is a foreign key in another table, and the other table has a column that is a foreign key in the first table
    - In this image we have another small piece of the ERD of the Pagila database, where we have the "Film", "Actor", and "Film Actor" tables
    - The "Film" table has a column named "Film ID", which is the same one that we found in the "Film Actor" table
    - However, the "Actor" table doesn't have a column named "Film ID", but it has a column named "Actor ID", which is the same one that we found in the "Film Actor" table
    - So, we can make relationships between films and actors using an intermediate table, "Film Actor"
    - Since the relationships between "Film" and "Film Actor" and between "Actor" and "Film Actor" are One-to-Many, we end up with a Many-to-Many relationship between "Film" and "Actor"

<br>

- __`[CHANGE SCENE] webcam in full screen`__

    - Alright, so now that we have a basic understanding of how tables and columns are organized, let's take a look at the SQL language itself.
    - There are many SQL distributions, for example, MySQL, or SQLite, but the one we will be using is PostgreSQL
    - One way to manage databases in PostgreSQL is using the pgAdmin platform
    - If you need help installing pgAdmin, or PostgreSQL, please, refer to the previous lesson in this module called "SQL Setup"
    - pgAdmin allows us to make queries to the database through SQL statements
    - There are mainly four types of SQL statements that will allow us to
        - Create
        - Read
        - Update and
        - Delete
    - Which constitute the CRUD operations. 
    - Here we are going to focus on the Read operation, which is the one that allows us to retrieve data from the database
    - So, what better way to learn how to use the SQL language than to get our hands dirty with it?
    - I am going to open pgAdmin4 to show you how to make queries to the database

<br>

- __`[CHANGE SCENE] Open pgAdmin4`__

    - Alright, we are going to use the Pagila database to retrieve data
    - On the left side of the pgAdmin4 window, there is a list of databases, select the Pagila database, and then click on the "Query Tool" button, which is the one with the database icon and a play icon __`[Point to the Query Tool button with the mouse]`__
    - A new window will open, and this will allow us to make queries to this database
    - Great, so let's start reading data. The most common way to read data is to use the SELECT statement
    - The syntax is SELECT, followed by the columns that you want to retrieve, followed by FROM, and then the table that you want to retrieve the data from
    - For example, let's say that we want to retrieve the first name and last name of all the customers in the database
    - We would write the following query __`[WRITE AS YOU READ THIS OUT LOUD]`__  
    ```
    SELECT first_name, last_name FROM customer;
    ``` 
    - __`[PRESS THE PLAY BUTTON]`__
    - One thing to notice from this query is that the SELECT and the FROM keywords are uppercase. While this is not mandatory, it is a good practice to follow this convention
    - Also, notice that at the end of the query there is a semicolon, which indicates that the query is finished
    - By the way, when I run this query, I pressed the play button, but you can also press F5 to run the query
    - __`[PRESS F5]`__
    - Which is a shortcut for the play button that makes things easier
    - If you want to retrieve ALL the columns from a table, you can write an asterisk to specify that you want to retrieve all the columns
    - So, to retrieve all the columns from customer you can write:
    ```
    SELECT * FROM customer;
    ```
    - Simple enough, right? Then let's move on to add some post-processing to the query
    - Post-processing is a way to modify the data that you retrieve from the database
    - So, once you make the SELECT query, you can specify how many rows you want to retrieve, and how you want to sort the data
    - For example, let's say that we want to read the first 10 customers from the database. You can write the following query __`[WRITE AS YOU READ THIS OUT LOUD]`__
    ```
    SELECT * FROM customer 
    LIMIT 10;
    ```
    - Now, let's say that we want sort all the customer by their last name. You can write the following query __`[WRITE AS YOU READ THIS OUT LOUD]`__
    ```
    SELECT * FROM customer
    ORDER BY last_name;
    ```
    - What if we want to sort them in reverse order? You can add the DESC keyword to the ORDER BY clause like this:
    ```
    SELECT * FROM customer
    ORDER BY last_name DESC;
    ```
    - And you can combine both to get the first 10 customers sorted by their last name in reverse order writing the following query
    ```
    SELECT * FROM customer
    ORDER BY last_name DESC
    LIMIT 10;
    ```
    - Notice what happens when I change the order of the LIMIT and the ORDER BY clauses
    ```
    SELECT * FROM customer
    LIMIT 10
    ORDER BY last_name DESC;
    ```
    - This throws and error because in SQL, some statements are not allowed to be placed before others. In fact, notice the output of the following query:
    ```
    SELECT * FROM customer
    ORDER BY last_name
    LIMIT 10;
    ```
    - Can you tell which statement run first? ORDER BY or LIMIT? __`[Make a pause]`__
    - Exactly, the ORDER BY clause runs first, and from the output we are trimming the first 10 customers from the list
    - Now that we know how to post-process the output of a query, what about select some specific rows from the database based on some conditions?
    - We can do this by using the WHERE clause
    - The syntax is quite simple, we add the WHERE keyword after FROM, and then we add the conditions that each row must meet
    - For example, let's say that we want to retrieve the title and the rental rate of all the movies whose rental rate is 2.99. We can do this by writing the following query
    ```
    SELECT title, rental_rate FROM film
    WHERE rental_rate = 2.99;
    ```
    - Looks like it's working! What if we want to look at the movies whose rental rate is greater than 2.99? The query is almost identical:
    ```
    SELECT title, rental_rate FROM film
    WHERE rental_rate > 2.99;
    ```
    - Let's say now that we want to retrieve all the movies whose rental rate is greater than 2.99, and then get the first 10 of them sorted by their title. 
    - We can combine WHERE, LIMIT and ORDER BY clauses like this:
    ```
    SELECT title, rental_rate FROM film
    WHERE rental_rate > 2.99
    ORDER BY title
    LIMIT 10;
    ```
    - So, can you guess in which order the clauses are executed? Now I am talking about SELECT, FROM, WHERE, ORDER BY, and LIMIT __`[Make a pause]`__
    - This might be a little bit trickier, so congratulations if you have already figured it out!
    - The order is FROM, WHERE, SELECT, ORDER BY, and LIMIT
    - First, we are selecting the table using FROM, then we filter the rows using WHERE, then we select the columns using SELECT, then we sort the rows using ORDER BY, and finally we limit the number of rows using LIMIT
    - Alright, let's review other sort of conditions that we can use in the WHERE clause
    - You can add different keywords to the WHERE clause to specify different conditions. 
    - For example, you can use LIKE if you want to specify a pattern that the value must match. For example, let's say that we want to retrieve all the movies whose title contains the word "The"
    - We can write the following query
    ```
    SELECT title, rental_rate FROM film
    WHERE title LIKE '%THE%';
    ```
    - The % symbol is called a wildcard, and it means that the value can be anything. Depending on its position, the wildcard can match the beginning, the end, or both of the value. For example, if we want to retrieve all the movies whose title starts the word "THE", we can write the following query
    ```
    SELECT title, rental_rate FROM film
    WHERE title LIKE 'The%';
    ```
    - And if we want to retrieve all the movies whose title ends with the word "S", we can write the following query
    ```
    SELECT title, rental_rate FROM film
    WHERE title LIKE '%S';
    ```
    - Opposite to LIKE, we can use NOT LIKE to find values that don't follow the pattern. For example, let's say that we want to retrieve all the movies whose title does not contain the word "The"
    - We can write the following query
    ```
    SELECT title, rental_rate FROM film
    WHERE title NOT LIKE '%THE%';
    ```
    - If you want to check values that are in a list, you can use IN. For example, if we want to check values whose rating is either PG or G, we can write the following query
    ```
    SELECT title, rental_rate FROM film
    WHERE rating IN ('PG', 'G');
    ```
    - And similarly to LIKE, we can use NOT IN to find values that are not in a list
    ```
    SELECT title, rental_rate, rating FROM film
    WHERE rating NOT IN ('PG', 'G');
    ```
    - You can add more than one condition to the WHERE clause by using AND or OR
    - For example, let's say that we want to retrieve all the movies whose rental rate is greater than 2.99 and whose rating is equal to PG. We can write the following query
    ```
    SELECT title, rental_rate, rating FROM film
    WHERE rental_rate > 2.99 AND rating = 'PG';
    ```
    - So the output of this query meets both requirements. If with one condition we have enough, we can use the OR statement like this:
    ```
    SELECT title, rental_rate, rating FROM film
    WHERE rental_rate > 2.99 OR rating = 'PG';
    ```
    - Notice that now the samples in the output don't meet both requirements simultaneously.
    - Finally, you can set a condition that establishes two boundaries by using BETWEEN. For example, let's say that we want to retrieve all the movies whose length is between 60 and 100 minutes. We can write the following query:
    ```
    SELECT title, length FROM film
    WHERE length BETWEEN 60 AND 100;
    ```
    - To finish off, let's mention one more thing you can select using the SELECT statement in SQL. 
    - So far, we have been selecting the columns as they are, maybe filtering rows using the WHERE clause, or limiting the number of rows using the LIMIT clause. 
    - But we can also retrieve columns that are combinations of other columns. In other words, we can perform arithmetic operations on columns and select the result.
    - After performing the operation, we can give a name to the resulting column
    - For example, let's say that we want to calculate how much a minute of a movie costs. We would need to divide the rental rate by the length of the movie. We can do this by writing the following query
    ```
    SELECT title, rental_rate, length, (rental_rate / length) AS cost_per_minute FROM film;
    ```
    - Notice that we are using the AS keyword to give a name to the resulting column. This is called aliasing.
    - Technically, you don't need the AS keyword, but if you are not used to SQL, you will find that it is very useful. 
    - You can also calculate the highest cost as the addition of the rental rate and the replacement cost of a movie. We can write the following query
    ```
    SELECT title, rental_rate, replacement_cost, (rental_rate + replacement_cost) AS total_cost FROM film;
    ```
    - So, as you can see, you can easily perform arithmetic operations on columns and give the output a name.


<br>

- __`[CHANGE SCENE] webcam in full screen`__
    - Great! Now you now how to read data from a database using the SELECT statement.
    - We also learned what a relational database is, and why this organization is so important.
    - Bear in mind that these databases are usually represented as tables connected between each other.
    - The diagram showing the relationships between the tables is called ERD
    - Once you know how the data is organized in the database, you can start to write queries to retrieve data from it.
    - We also reviewed post-processing queries, which are queries that are used to analyze the data after it has been retrieved.
    - And conditions that we can use in the WHERE clause.
    - Now that you know how to read data using the SELECT statement, you are one step closer to become a SQL expert!