# SQL JOINS

## Setup

### What do i need open?

- You will need to open pgAdmin4, and if you have it, open the Pagila database. Otherwise, the file can be foung in the SQL Setup lesson
- Keynote with .SQL_Joins.key
- OBS
    
### What recording scenes do I need open?

- Screencapture of pgAdmin4 with your webcam capture in the corner
- Screencapture of Keynote with your webcam capture in the corner
- Webcam capture in full screen

## Script

- __`[START SCENE] webcam in full screen`__
    - When making queries to a database, you can perform these queries to one or multiple tables
    - If you want to make a query to a single table, it seems obvious that the SQL commands do not involve other tables. 
    - But when you want to make a query that involves multiple tables, you need some way to find the rows that are related to each other
    - One way to do this is to use `JOIN` statements
    - Before we get into the details of the `JOIN` statements, let's very briefly remind ourselves the principles of a Entity Relationship Diagram, or ERD

<br>

- __`[CHANGE SCENE] Open .SQL_Joins.key`__
    - An ERD is a diagram that shows the relationships between tables in a database
    - In this example, we have a database that represents the songs and artists in a music database, and the users that listen to these songs and the playlists that they created
    - This is an example of an ERD, where each table is connected to another one by a relationship, usually found through a common column
    - There are a few different types of relationships, but the most common one is given by a foreign key and the corresponding primary key in the other table
    - For example, the songs table has two foreign keys that point to the artists, and albums tables.
    - These tables, in turn, have a primary key that lets us make the connection between this table and the songs table
    - Thanks to all the connections in this ERD, we can make much bigger queries to the database. 
    - For example, we can make a query to find the most popular artists listened by a user
    - Or what is the most popular song included in a playlist by a particular demographic
    - So, let's see examples on how to harness the power of the JOIN statements!

<br>

- __`[CHANGE SCENE] Open pgAdmin4`__
    - Let's open the Pagila database
    - We want to see all the movies that belong to the 'Comedy' category
    - So, if we take a look at the film table:
    ```
    SELECT * FROM film;
    ```
    - __`[ON THE OUTPUT WINDOW, SLOWLY SCROLL TO THE RIGHT]`__ We can see that there is no category column
    - Luckily, we have two different tables that we can leverage to make our query
    - The first one is the category table, and the second one is the film_category table
    - Let's take a look at the category table:
    ```
    SELECT * FROM category;
    ```
    - We can see that the 'Comedy' category has a category_id of 5.
    - So, we could use this category_id in the film_category table to find all the film_ids that belong to the 'Comedy' category:
    ```
    SELECT * FROM film_category 
    WHERE category_id = 5;
    ```
    - Great, now we have the film_ids that we need to find the corresponding films. The film_ids are 7, 28, 99, 119, 127... Wait, there are a lot of ids! That would also require a lot of conditions in the query
    - Is there any way to make this query more efficient?
    - This is where the JOIN statements come in.
    - JOIN statements are used to find the values in a column that are equal to the values in a column in the other table
    - There are mainly four types of JOIN statements:
    - `INNER JOIN`
    - `LEFT JOIN`
    - `RIGHT JOIN`
    - `FULL OUTER JOIN`
    - Let's take a look at the INNER JOIN statement first.
    - The general syntax for an INNER JOIN statement is:
    ```
    SELECT * FROM table1 
    JOIN table2 
    ON table1.column = table2.column;
    ```
    - Notice that I am not writing `INNER JOIN` in the query, but instead I am writing `JOIN`. This actually returns the same result as the `INNER JOIN` statement.
    - We also use the `ON` keyword to specify the column that we want to join on
    - This column doesn't have to have the same name in both tables
    - So, in the previous example, we got the film_ids whose category is 'Comedy'
    - Let's see how to use a `JOIN` statement in this example:
    ```
    SELECT * FROM category
    JOIN film_category
    ON category.category_id = film_category.category_id
    WHERE category.name = 'Comedy';
    ```
    - There are a few things to comment on this query.
    - First, we are explicitly especifying that 'Comedy' has to be in the category table. In this case, if we removed the name of the table, we would get the same result. But it is a good practice to always specify the name of the table, since we avoid any sort of ambiguity.
    - On the output, notice that there are repeated columns. This is because we are joining both tables, and they have the same columns.
    - From this output, can you guess the order in which the operations are executed? __`[MAKE A PAUSE]`__
    - The order is: FROM, JOIN, WHERE, and finally SELECT.
    - First, we need to find the tables we are going to use using the FROM and the JOIN clauses
    - Then, we can filter the results using the WHERE clause
    - Finally, we can select the columns we want to see using the SELECT clause
    - Alright, this sounds great, but we still want to retrieve the films that belong to the 'Comedy' category, and so far, we only have their ids.
    - You can use more than one JOIN statement in a query. You can think of this as a chain of JOIN statements, where the output of the first JOIN is passed to the second JOIN, and so on.
    - So, let's add a second JOIN statement to the query:
    ```
    SELECT category.name, film.title FROM category
    JOIN film_category
    ON category.category_id = film_category.category_id
    JOIN film
    ON film_category.film_id = film.film_id
    WHERE category.name = 'Comedy';
    ```
    - Good, it worked! Notice that in the `SELECT` statement we are again explicitly specifying the name of the table.
    - You can also use aliases to make the query more readable:
    ```
    SELECT ca.name, fi.title FROM category AS ca
    JOIN film_category AS fc
    ON ca.category_id = fc.category_id
    JOIN film AS fi
    ON fc.film_id = fi.film_id
    WHERE ca.name = 'Comedy';
    ```
    - Remember that, once you use aliases, you need to use the same alias in the `SELECT` statement.
    - And, as you might already know, the `AS` keyword is not required:
    ```
    SELECT ca.name, fi.title FROM category ca
    JOIN film_category fc
    ON ca.category_id = fc.category_id
    JOIN film fi
    ON fc.film_id = fi.film_id
    WHERE ca.name = 'Comedy';
    ```
    - Great, now we know how to use `INNER JOIN` statements.
    - Let's take a look now at the LEFT and RIGHT JOIN statements.
    - These two commands are almost identical between themselves, and the difference lies in the order we write the tables in the query.
    - `LEFT JOIN` works the same way as `INNER JOIN`, but it will return the rows from the left table if there is no match in the right table.
    - Let's take a look at a different example, where we want to find the addresses of the customers. First, let's do it with an `INNER JOIN` statement:
    ```
    SELECT * FROM address AS ad
    JOIN customer AS cu
    ON ad.address_id = cu.address_id
    ```
    - ___`[SCROLL DOWN TO THE BOTTOM]`__ Notice that the query returned 599 rows
    - Let's take a look now at the `LEFT JOIN` statement:
    ```
    SELECT * FROM address AS ad
    LEFT JOIN customer AS cu
    ON ad.address_id = cu.address_id
    ```
    - ___`[SCROLL DOWN TO THE BOTTOM]`__ Now we have 603 rows, notice that the 4 new rows have an address_id, but __`[SCROLL TO THE RIGHT]`__ there are no customers with that address_id.
    - This happened because the `LEFT JOIN` statement returns all the rows from the left table, even if there are no matches in the right table. So, in this case, the query returned all the addresses, even if there are no customers with that address.
    - On the other hand, with the `INNER JOIN` statement, the query will return only the addresses that have a customer with that address, so that's why we obtained fewer rows.
    - Let's take a look at the `RIGHT JOIN` statement. The `RIGHT JOIN` statement works the same way as the `LEFT JOIN` statement, but it returns the rows from the right table if there is no match in the left table.
    - So basically they work the same way, but the order of the tables is different.
    - Let's use the same example, first keeping the same order as before:
    ```
    SELECT * FROM address AS ad
    RIGHT JOIN customer AS cu
    ON ad.address_id = cu.address_id
    ```
    - Once again, we have 599 rows. This is because all the customers have an address, but not all the addresses have a customer.
    - If we change the order of the tables, we get the same result as we obtained with the `LEFT JOIN` statement:
    ```
    SELECT * FROM customer AS cu
    RIGHT JOIN address AS ad
    ON ad.address_id = cu.address_id
    ```
    - Yes, once again, we have 603 rows.
    - Finally, let's use the `FULL JOIN` or `FULL OUTER JOIN` statement.
    - `FULL JOIN` is rarely used, but it is useful when you want to retrieve all the rows from both tables.
    - It might be helpful when you want to have a complete list of all the rows and columns of both tables
    - As opposed to the left and right joins, the order doesn't matter in this case, since we are going to retrieve all the rows from both tables.
    - Let's use the same example, but this time with the `FULL JOIN` statement:
    ```
    SELECT * FROM address AS ad
    FULL JOIN customer AS cu
    ON ad.address_id = cu.address_id
    ```
    - We obtained 603 rows, meaning that `FULL JOIN` took into account those addresses with no customers registered.

<br>

- __`[CHANGE SCENE] webcam in full screen`__
    - You learned how to make better use of the relationships between tables.
    - You will eventually see more complicated queries that involve more than one relationship between tables, so make sure you understand how to use the JOIN statements.
    - You learned how to use the four main JOIN statements:
    - `INNER JOIN`, which returns the rows from the left table if there is a match in the right table.
    - `LEFT JOIN`, which returns all the rows from the left table, even if there are no matches in the right table.
    - `RIGHT JOIN`, which returns all the rows from the right table, even if there are no matches in the left table.
    - `FULL JOIN`, which returns all the rows from both tables, even if there are no matches in the other table.
    - You are one step closer to mastering SQL, let's keep going!