# Arithmetic, Variable Assignment and Strings


## Setup

### What do I need open?
- VSCode
    - file containing some 
### What recording scenes do I need open?
- Screencapture of vscode with your webcam capture in the corner
- Webcam capture in full screen

## Script

- __`[IN FULL-SCREEN WEBCAM]`__
- I'm sure you are excited to know how to create AI applications using Python, but, of course, you'll need to understand the basics of Python before that. 

- before we see any code the very first thing we should look at are comments. 
- comments are arenything written after a hash symbol
- Python will not try and run anything within a comment
- they should be used for explaining how something works

- __`[IN SCREEN CAPTURE MODE WITH WEBCAM IN CORNER]`__
- In programming, it's useful to store different pieces of information in different formats.
- For example, we want to store someone's age as an integer, but their name as a word
- We call these different formats "data types."
- So, what data types can we include in the code? 
    - __`[SHOW in python file]`__ List with main objects:
        - Integers (int).
        - Floating Point Numbers (float).
        - Strings (str).
        - Lists (list).
        - Sets (set).
        - Dictionaries (dict).
        - Tuples (tuple).
        - Booleans (bool).

        - We won't go into more detail here, but it's important to note that Python comes with many other different data types, and we can even create our custom ones.
        - In this video, we will focus on integers, floating points and strings.
        - __`[Pointing to the Integers in the list]`__ Basically, an integer is a number with no decimal part and __`[Pointing to the Floating]`__ a floating-point number is a number with a decimal point.

### Integers and Floating points 

- __`[SHOW in a python file in VSCode]`__ `type(3)`
    - Python is a dynamically typed language, meaning that we don't have to specify the object type when creating the object. Python will automatically infer its type _(If it walks like a duck, and quacks like a duck, then it probably is a duck)_
    - Python knows that this number __`[Run the code]`__ is an integer
    - here i'm showing the first example of a function, "type"
    - under the hood, functions run a larger piece of code when they are followed by parentheses
    - this is known as calling a function 
    - in this case the call of the type function becomes equal to a value, which is the type of the value given in the parentheses
    - when a piece of code becomes equal to a value, we call it an expression, if it doesn't we call it a statement
    - when I run a notebook cell, if the last line is an expression and becomes equal to a value, then it is shown below the cell
- __`[SHOW in VSCode]`__ `type(3.4)`
    - here' python that this is a floating-point number
- __`[SHOW in VSCode]`__ `print(4 + 2)`
    - We can perform arithmetic operations in Python by simply using the corresponding operator.
    - After running this, we obtain the addition of 4 and 2
    - print is another function, which will print something to the output, which in this case is the space below the cell
    - the print function will do this even if it is not an expression on the last line
    - if you want to be sure to print something, use the print function
    - printing values so you can see them is the first step in fixing errors in your code
- __`[SHOW in VSCode]`__ `print(4 - 2)`
    - After running this, we obtain the subtraction of 4 and 2
- __`[SHOW in VSCode]`__ `print(4 * 2)`
    - and division by a slash
- __`[SHOW in VSCode]`__ `print(4 / 2)`
    - and division by a slash
- __`[SHOW in VSCode]`__ `print(4 ** 2)`
    - Powers are represented by a double asterisk
- __`[SHOW in VSCode]`__ `print(5 % 2)`
    - And two special division operations: remainder, which is represented by a percentage sign
- __`[SHOW in VSCode]`__ `print(5 // 2)`
    - and floor division, which is represented by a double slash
    - Operations in Python happen in the regular BIDMAS 
    - that is, first brackets, then indices, then division, then multiplication, then addition, then subtraction
- __`[SHOW in VSCode]`__ `print(type(4 / 2))`
    - Notice the type of the output of a division
    - We obtain a floating-point number 

### None Type

- 0 is a number. 
- but python provides another type 'None' if we want to define lack of value.
- __`[SHOW in VSCode]`__ `print(type(None)); print(type(0))`

- With this, we can perform virtually any arithmetic operation, but you will need to store the results of the calculations in a variable. In fact, you will need to store many values in variables

- Let's take a look at how to assign a value to a variable in Python

### Variable Assignment

- Assigning variables in Python is fairly simple, just use the equal sign!
- However, there are some rules that apply:
    - The left hand side of the assignment operation is the variable that will take the value on the right hand side.
    - Whatever is on the right hand side has to be a known value
    - __`[SHOW]`__ `x = 1 + 2; x = 1 + y; x + 1 = y`
        - For example x = 1 + 2 work fine
        - x = 1 + y is not valid because `y` is not known
        - And x + 1 = y is also not valid because we are assigning variables, not working with equations!
- Once assigned, the variable can be reassigned
- __`[SHOW]`__ `x = 1 + 2; print(x); x = 1 + 5; print(x)`
    - As you can see, the first print statements outputs 3, and then the new value of x is replaced by 6

### Variable naming

- Python is a reasonably flexible programming language, but there are some rules and conventions that anyone should follow to avoid undesired errors.

- Two rules about variable names:
    - __`[SHOW]`__ `x_1 = 1 + 2; 1_x = 1 + 2`
        1. Variable names can contain numbers, but they can't start with a number
            - Thus, x_1 = 1 + 2 is legit
            - But, 1_x = 1 + 2 is not!
    - __`[SHOW]`__ `__\: \' \" \, \< \> \/ \? \| \\ \( \) \! @ \# \$ \% \^ \& \* \~ \- \+__` _and in a different cell_ `x_1 = 2; x-1 = 2`

        2. Variable names can't contain any of these special characters
            - Thus, x_1 = 2 is legit
            - But, x-1 = 2 is not!
    - And some conventions about variables names:
        1. Use snake case naming, so all lowercase, and words separated by an underscore:
        - __`[SHOW]`__ `x_good; xbad; XWorse`
            - So, `x_good` looks fine
            - `xbad` looks not so good
            - and `XWorse` looks terrible!
        2. It should always be clear to others what your code is doing. So never sacrifice readability for variable name length. A long explicit variable name is always better than an ambiguous succinct name.
        2. Avoid using lowercase "l", uppercase "o", uppercase "i" as single-character names. Those might be confusing for the reader!
        3. Don't use Python keywords or the names of builtin functions as variable names.
            - otherwise you'll overwrite them!

### Python Strings

- Strings are variables that represent text, or a sequence of characters
- __`[SHOW in VSCode]`__ `print('Hello'); print("Hi"); print(Hey)`
    - Strings are represented with text enclosed by single quotes or double quotes
    - If you miss the quotes, then Python will 
- Strings will "finish" as soon as Python finds the matching quotation mark. So for example
- __`[SHOW in VSCode]`__ `print('What's up')`
    - This has many errors:
        - First, it has a string containing 'What'.
        - Then, a variable named "s".
        - After that, a variable named up
        - And finally, an unmatched quotation mark

- We can avoid this using double quotes so that our string doesn't end where there should be an apostrophe
- or we can place a backslash just before the character which we don't want to be evaluated as usual
- we call this "escaping" the character


### String Operations and methods

- So, now I'll just show a few of the different things you can do with strings
- Commonly, you might need to concatenate two strings
- Python allows you to do this using the + operator

- in python, there are a bunch of operations that only make sense to perform on certain datatypes
- for example, it makes sense to capitalise strings but not numbers
- when this is the case, that function is often part of the variable, which we can access through the dot operator
- __`[RUN CAPITALIZE CELL]`__
- we call these functions attached to variables, methods
- __`[SHOW in VSCode]`__ `x = "hello"; print(x.upper()); y = "GOOD MORNING"; print(y.lower()); z = "hEeEeEey"; print(z.capitalize())`

- Another common thing to do is separate a string into different components based on a separator.
- You can do this using the split method which by default separates the string on whitespaces
- __`[SHOW in VSCode]`__ `x = "Python is an interpreted high-level general-purpose programming language"; print(x.split())`
    - Notice that the output has square brackets containing each part of the string which was separated by a space
    - This indicates that we obtained a list, which is a Python datatype that we will see in the next lesson
- __`[SHOW in VSCode]`__ `x = "Python is an interpreted high-level general-purpose programming language"; print(x.split('-'))`
    - We can also specify the character or word we can to split on




- Another thing you will commonly want to do is set a different part of a string to the value of a variable
- we call this "string formatting"
- the best way to do it is using what are known as f-strings
- In f-strings, the variable names or python expressions are evaluated when placed within curly brackets
- __`[RUN F-STRING]`__
- there are other ways to do string formatting
- but f-strings are the only way you should be doing it
- it's modern and its readable
- don't let me catch you using the format method

## String Slicing

- To finish off this video, let's see how to get certain parts in a string
- We can get a single element, which is named indexing, or to get a range of elements, which is named slicing, by using square brackets 
- Some things to take into account
- __`[RUN INDEX 0 CELL]`__
- Python is 0 indexed, so index 0 corresponds to P
- __`[RUN INDEX -1 CELL]`__
- Index -1 corresponds to the last one, so index -1 is the same as index 5
- __`[RUN INDEX 5 CELL]`__
- slicing is where the start and stop index are given, so you can select a range of the string rather than just a single character
- Slicing includes the lower bound but not the upper bound.
- __`[RUN SLICE CELL]`__
- So index 1 to 3 returns Y and T, but not O
- if we don't specify a lower or upper bound, Python assumes that the lower bound is 0 or the upper bound is -1, respectively
- __`[SHOW in VSCode]`__ `x = "PYTHON"; print(x[:2]); print(x[2:])`

- One last thing about strings is that they are immutable, meaning that we can't change parts of them without reassigning the whole string
- __`[SHOW in VSCode]`__ `x = "PYTHON"; x[0] = 'p'`
    - This means it doesn't work because strings are immutable

### Key takeaways

So here we've seen
    - Python has some different data types
    - we saw integers, floating point numbers and strings
    - We can assign values to variables with names to re-use them
    - We can perform arithmetic in python
    - we saw that certain variables have their own functions attached, which we call methods
    - You can index or slice variables using square brackets 