# 6. Project Structure

- Why having a good structure is important
- Python is quite flexible in terms of structuring your project
    - This is good, you can create a structure according to your needs
    - This creates debate, people have different perspectives and there is not a clear better framework
- This notebook provides some examples

-[Challenge] 
    Let's go with an example. The `examples` folder in this repo contains `celebrities_births.py`. This file uses the `requests` and `BeautifulSoup` libraries to go to a certain date in Wikipedia and checks celebrities that were born that day.

1. Go to GitHub and Create a repo named 'Celebrities Births'. 
2. Add a `README` file, a `.gitignore` file and a `LICENSE` (the MIT license will be perfectly fine)
3. `git clone` that repo somewhere you can easily locate
4. Copy the `celebrities_births.py` script in the cloned repo
5. Give a docstring to the Scraper class as well as to its methods.
6. Create a test file named `test_celebrity_birth.py`
7. In this file, include a class that check that the Date class works fine. Add at least 3 unit test (For example, check the `__lt__`, `date_valid`, and `from_string` methods return what they are expected to return). If you expect a date that is not valid, you can use [assertRaise](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/6103825/how-to-properly-use-unit-testings-assertraises-with-nonetype-objects) for example: `with self.assertRaises(ValueError) as err: Date(32, 5, 2020)`

8. In the same file, include another class that checks that the Scraper class works fine. Add a `setUp()` method

9. Add at least 2 unit tests (for example, check that, if given a wrong date (`February_30`), Wikipedia won't find the page (Use `self.assertRaises`). Or check that, given a right date, Wikipedia returns a HTML code with a header titled 'Births' (You will need to access a private method for this example (`_get_birth_header`). The text should be `'Births[edit]'`)

10. Add an integration test class that checks that both classes can work together. Instantiate one Date object named `date`. This will take the 27 of March of the year you want. Use the `to_wiki_format()` on `date` and store the value as `date_wiki`. Instantiate a new Scraper instance and call it `scraper`. Use the method `get_celebrities` on `scraper` and pass `date_wiki` as the argument, store the list in `celebrities`. Use assertIn to check that `Quentin Tarantino` is in `celebrities`.
11. Create a `requirements.txt` where you include the external libraries to make this code run. In this case, we only used requests and BeautifulSoup, so let's include those as well as their extensions.

- [Challenge] 2:
1. Change your directory according to the above structure
2. Add the setup files. Make sure to change it according to your data, and give it a characteristic name (if it already exists on PyPi, it won't work!)
3. Go to [PyPi](https://pypi.org) and create and account if you didn't have one (Remember the credentials!)
4. In the terminal, go to your project directory and run `python setup.py sdist` which stands for source distribution
5. Now we need something to upload it to PyPi. Download twine by running `pip install twine`
6. Run twine in your directory, and telling it what to upload by running `twine upload dist/*` so it will run everything from the folder we created after step 4
7. Introduce your credentials, and... voilá! You made your contribution to the Python open source world :)