# Principles of OOP Design

## Setup

Open the .code.ipynb file

## Script

it's important to orgainise your code. It makes it easier to diagnose problems, debug errors, and avoid repeating things. It also makes it easier for others to read, understand, and use your code.

Here I want to talk about some practices for structuring projects, which is key for writing clean code.

### Concerns, scope, and Namespaces

First we need to define some concepts: Concerns, scope and namespaces.

### Concerns
-  In programming a "concern" is a distinct behaviour you would like your code to perform. For instance if you have a program which collects data from a website it's going to have to do at least two things: navigate the website, and save the data. These would be two different "concerns" of your program.
 - A key thing which you want to achieve with your code is "separation of concerns"

### Scopes

- Another key term is "Scope". Scope defines the area of a program where an item such as a variable, function, or constant is recognised. 
- In Python there are four main scopes to be concerned with.
    - Local scope is the scope which contains the names that you define inside a function.
    - Enclosing scope is a scope which exists for nested functions. If the local scope is the scope for the inside of a nested function, then the enclosing scope will be the scope for the outer or enclosing function.
    - Global scope is the scope containing all names that you define at the top level of your program or a module.
    - Built-In scope is the Python scope created whenever you run a script or open an interactive session. 
- These rules determine where variables are accessible, and where they are undefined
- and python looks for them in that same order
    - local, then enclosing, then global, and finally builtin scope

__`[SHOW IN VS CODE]`__ awesome function which shows the different levels of scope.
- So "i'll show that in code now
- Notice we can't print `local_variable` outside of the incredible function since it exists in the local scope.  
[GO TO NEXT PIECE OF CODE]
- Now notice we can print the enclosing variable outside of the outer since it exists in the enclosing scope.
- Also notice we can use the print function in all scopes since it exists in Python's built-in scope
- So consider the scope of your variable when defining your functions, or when trying to diagnose nameerrors which are talking about undefined variables

### Namespace

- Another key term is "namespace". A Namespace is a collection of currently defined names with information about the object that each of them references. Another way to view this is namespaces are a set of names contained in a scope. Scope and namespaces are similar but not quite the same.
- Behind the scenes, Python namespaces are implemented as dictionaries that map names to objects. 
- Namespaces determine which identifiers are available, and a scope defines where in your code a namespace can be accessed.

- Separating code into different namespaces helps to minimise collisions between variables with the same names in different files or parts of the same file.
- When defining a variable, it should be defined in the narrowest scope where it is required.
    - If a temporary variable is only used once within a function, it should be defined in the local scope of that function
    - If a variable is used in many different parts of your code, it might make sense to put it in the global scope
        - An example of this might be a variable that represents a filepath for logging errors into

- When you open a Python interpreter the `built-in` scope is populated with Pythons built-in objects in Python including `print()` or `len`


__`[SHOW IN VS CODE]`__ print __name__ 
- Another interesting one is `__name__`.  
- The `__name__` attribute indicates the namespaces of the file which is being run. 
- Here we can see that it is equal to `"__main__"` for the interactive prompt.
- Now we know why the line if __`[SHOW IN VS CODE]`__ __name__ == '__main__' statement will only run code from our main file - that is, the one which we ran directly, rather than one which was ran indirectly when we imported it
- Any time you have code that should only run when a file is called directly, it should go inside this name = main block


__`[SHOW IN VS CODE]`__ Show importing of foo and check it's namespace.
- if you import a module then it's `__name__` attribute will be equal to the modules name.
- foo's name is equal to foo since it exists in that module. 
- Also using `__dict__` we can see all the objects that exist in it's name space.
- __`[OPEN THE FOO.PY FILE]`__ We can see that the foo module contains the variables x = "I have changed again" and y = "Y am I here?"
- __`[SWITCH BACK TO CODE SCROLL TO OUTPUT OF CELL]`__ we can see in the output of foo.__dict__ that those variables are in the dictionary or namespace of foo. 

### Namespaces and imports 

When you import a module in Python, Python will create an additional namespace for that module by creating a new dictionary for it. When we import a module into our main file Python creates an additional namespace for that module within the main namespace. 

- __`[SHOW IN VS CODE]`__ Importing of foo.py and that it's variables start with foo.
    - When we import a module into our main namespace we can access those variables in the main namespace through the dot operator 

- __`[SHOW IN VS CODE]`__ Show in vscode calling foo.x in local and enclosed namespace.
    - Also note that these variables are available in the global namespace.

- __`[SHOW ON SLIDES THE NAMESPACE SCOPE DIAGRAM]`__ 
    - Two important things to note here is we can see that lower level namespaces can access all names from the namespaces above.
    - But lower level name spaces are able to overwrite higher level namespaces. 
  
- __`[SHOW IN VS CODE]`__ Show in code notebook overwriting the Python print function.

One thing to watch out for when importing modules is that if you have already imported your module. If you import it again then the import statement will not work again.

- __`[SHOW IN VS CODE]`__ importing the foo module and trying to overwrite it's value by import again.
    - Firstly we will import foo and print foo.x which will have the value we expect.
    - Now if we overwrite the value of foo.x and print we can see we have changed it. 
    - Now let's try to re-import it and check the value of foo.x
    - it hasn't changed because Python has checked the foo namespace and seen that it is already there so doesn't try to import the module again.

- Finally the last thing to note about namespaces and scopes is that sometimes libraries will have methods with the same names. So if you import them and try to use the methods or function with the same name then Python will only use the last one imported. 

Let's take a look at this with the datetime and time modules.

__`[SHOW IN VS CODE]`__ import both modules and try to use the time function.
    - Notice it printed out the datetime in this instance since it was the last module to be imported. 
    - One way to get round this would be to specify the module first before the function. 
    - Additionally we could also use as after the modules being imported to give them a unique name. 
    - Now we can call the functions with their uniques names and they will both work as expected.

### Summary
Remember:
- Separate concerns of your program into different parts of the code
- Namespaces are a mapping between the variables and their values
- Scope defines which namespaces are accessible in each part of the code
- Always put any code inside an if name = main block if it's supposed to run only in the file you've run directly