- [DEMO] creating a github workflow
- [DEMO] 3 examples of a github workflow
    - portal
    - content deploy
    - content review
- [INDEPENDENTLY] Read the notebook and try challenge 1
- [CLASS]
    - [ASK]
        - any questions?
- [GROUP_CHALLENGES]
    - first challenge in .challenges.yaml
- [COMPREHENSION]
    - how do I create a workflow that runs when some event occurs?
    - Can you give me any examples of when I might use one?
    - in a github action, what's the difference between a job, a step and an action?
    - Do steps run in synchronously or asynchronously?
    - What about jobs?
    - Can everyone please open up the documentation? You'll need it to answer the following questions. If you're not sure where to find it, just ask.
    - What events can trigger a workflow run?
    - What's a GitHub runner?
    - how can I specify what image the job runs on?
    - Do jobs have to run on the same image?
    - What about steps?
    - Are the square brackes needed within the `on` necessary?
    - github runs workflows by looking for them in a specific location. Where is that?
    - what are the names of the pre-built actions are used in the default template? What do they do?
    - how can we securely store sensitive information like API access tokens that need to be used in our workflows?

- everyone take 5 minutes to write a simple unit test for the next challenge

- using github actions to deploy our SAM application
    - https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/compute/using-github-actions-to-deploy-serverless-applications/
- github secrets for AWS credentials

[Guide for deploying using webhook](https://levelup.gitconnected.com/automated-deployment-using-docker-github-actions-and-webhooks-54018fc12e32)

[Guide for deploying using AWS CodeDeploy](https://dev.to/ankushbehera/a-complete-guide-to-deploy-github-project-on-amazon-ec2-using-github-actions-and-aws-codedeploy-3f0b)