# AWS Cloudwatch

## Tour
- Go to the AWS CloudWatch services page
  - Point out the main features of CloudWatch and that they are all avaliable from the navigation bar.
    - Dashboards
    - Alarms
    - Logs
    - Metrics
    - Events
Show the main page by clicked CloudWatch above the navbar and show that it will give you an overview of all Cloudwatch alarms. 
    - Explain that alarms are critical to your orgainsation to know if an AWS resources have breached a threshold or has escaped a predfined range.
    - Examples for breaching thresholds, Lambda function has run with more than 5 errors, EC2 instance is over 95% CPU ultisation.
    - Examples for ranges, your machine learning models data has deviated outside a predefined range so you may need to retrain your model.
- Dashboards
    Go to the dashboard page and create a new dashboard, explain that you can have multiple dashboards for specific purposes. Dashboard to monitor all EC2 instances, one for the logs of all Lambda functions or a dashboard that combines many AWS metrics, logs, etc.
    
    - Show adding some widgets to the dashboard and the various options even custom widgets.
    - Create a line widget to track metrics 
      - Configure it to watch an EC2 instances CPU utilisation
      - Show you can use graph options to change the legends, axis and annotate the graph.
      - Go to graphed metrics and show you can add math expressions to your metric.
   
    - Now add a logs table widget to the dashboard
      - Run a query on some Lambda function to show the output of the logs. Remember to change the date range so the logs will be displayed.
      - Edit the simple query to show the results in ascending order and increase the limit.
      - Click the fields icon right hand side to show AWS will suggest fields you can use in your queries depending on the log group.
      - Show also there are predefined commonly used queries using the queries icon.
      - Finish creating the widget and show it on the dashboard.
      - 
  - Alarms
    - Go to the All alarms section and create a new alarm to with the error metric for a Lambda function.
      - Show that you can change the statistic it is measured against.
      - Show you can create custom time periods when the metric will be checked or use the preconfigured ones between 10secs and a day.
      - Show the options for configuring conditions either statically of using Anomaly detection if the standard deviation is above a threshold.
      - Go to the Additional configuration and show you can alert the amount of datapoints which need to be outside the threshold for a breach to occur.
      - Show options for how to treat missing data with the alarm.
    -  Configure actions
       -  Show you can pick the state to have the user alerted on.
       -  Setup to have a notification emailed to you using create new topic.
       -  Explain SNS is Amazons notification service but we won't be going into it in detail.
    - Change the Lambda function to run with errors and then show the alarm status has updated.
      -  Show that the timeline under the graph is coloured by the alarms state.
      -  Scroll down to show the history of the alarm and when the state changed.

  - Logs
    - Explain that log groups are groups of logs that share the same retention, monitoring and access control settings, usually from a specific AWS Resource. 
    - Usually log groups are created for you if the resources has multiple log stream.
    - Go to Log Groups show that the log group for your Lmabda function are already there
    - Go to log insights
      - Explain this is a similar screen to how we create our logs widget.
      - run a query again to show the lambda functions output.
    - check out the log streams for your lambda function
        - by default is everything printed in the function pushed to this log stream?
    - using cloudwatch logs
        - creating your own log streams
        - publishing to log streams
- rules:
    - create a rule to run a Lambda function periodically
    - Select Event pattern
      - Show an example of all the services you can select events for and the event types
      - Explain an event is just some change in an AWS resource
    - Configure an EC2 event for it's stopped state
      - Show we can add targets to deal with the event, for example run a Lambda function if this event happens.
      - Explain we can add multiple targets to deal with these events.

- metrics 
  - Show the All metrics section which is similar to creating a metrics widget
    - Explain we can use this section to quickly check metrics that are not on our dashboard or we might want to add to the dashboard.
  - go to the metrics explorer
    -  Show all the metrics you can explore
       -  Show you can configure the explorer to show all EC2 instance metrics at once.
       -  Show you can select the isntances by tags or properties. Example you could show all instances tagged in development or all instance tagged with production.
       -  Explain the aggregation and split options and we can quickly add these metric graphs to our dashboard.

