# The CLI

## Operating systems

- [WATCH] What is an operating system?
  - OS is just a collection of programs running. It makes it easier for us to communicate with the hardware
  - Not only desktop OS, but also mobile OSes
- [ASK] what operating system is everyone using?

## The CLI

- [WATCH] [What is the terminal?]()
  - OS translates clicks into commands, but before that, programmers used terminals, also known as CLI
  - [DEMO] graphical and non-graphical interfaces
    - open up your graphical file explorer and move around it
    - explain directory is just another word for folder
    - explain that you can do all of this in a non-graphical way
  - [EXPLAIN] a terminal is a way for you, as a human, to talk to the computer non-graphically
    - gives us much more flexibility in what we can tell the system to do
    - will be executed exactly as specified and as fast as possible
  - [DEMO] how to open a terminal
    - on mac/linux
    - on windows install git bash
  - [DEMO] basic commands for moving around the file system command syntax
    - `ls`
      - with arguments
      - with flags
      - show the man page
        - not all programs have a man page
    - `pwd`
    - `cd` with and without arguments
      - explain the meaning of
        - `.`
        - `..`
        - `~`
        - `/`
      - explain tab completion
  - [SHOW] using the integrated terminal in vscode
  - [DEMO] more basic commands
    - `touch` to create a new file
    - `echo`
    - output redirection from echo into file you `touch`ed
      - `>` to overwrite
      - `>>` to append
    - `cat` as a shortcut for showing the contents of a file
    - `clear`
  - [DEMO] tip: press up arrow to see prev command
  - [EXPLAIN] bash: the program running the terminal and the programming language that understands commands in
  - [DEMO] making a simple bash file
    - paste in a simple script (Use the example in the notebook HAG (Harry Awesomness Generator))
    - use CTRL C to interrupt the program and stop it
  - [EXPLAIN] aliases: custom names for commands
  - [EXPLAIN] ~/.bashrc is run every time a new terminal opens
- [ASK]
  - If `.` is this dir and `..` is the parent dir. What would you run to move up 2 levels? (not `...`)
- [BREAK] (10 mins)
- [CHALLENGE] (10 mins) everyone open their terminal and run these commands. Look up the ones you don't know using the man page or Google.

  - `ls`
  - `pwd`
  - `cd`
  - `mkdir`
  - `grep` (Use for example'Harry' harry.sh)

- [CHALLENGE] (5 mins) everyone look up a new terminal command, find out how it works
- [CHALLENGE] (10 mins) share it with the rest of the class
- [EXPLAIN] environment variables
  - we can evaluate variables by prefixing them with the $
  - $HOME
  -
  - PATH is a colon separated list of all the places that bash looks for programs it can run
  - (echo "$PATH" | tr ":" "\n" | nl)

1. List the contents of your current folder
2. Move into one of the subfolders
3. Move back out
4. Move to your home directory
5. Print your current working directory
6. echo your name back to the terminal output
7. Make a new directory (look it up)
8. touch a new file inside it
9. redirect your name into that file
10. Delete that file (look it up, and be careful)
