# Logistic regression

## What is classification data?
- [ASK] How is classification different from regression?
    Answer: labels are categorical
- [SHOW] Single feature data on graph, with binary label

## From linear regression to logistic regression
- [ASK] How the model needs to change?
    Answer: model needs to output probabilities
- [EXPLAIN] They need to output probabilities because we are still going to train the model using gradient descent, so it needs to be differentiable
- [ASK] Any idea how we can achieve this?
- Introduce the sigmoid function
- Introduce the concept of a logit
- [SHOW] diagram of logistic regression model
- [SHOW] the chain rule for a logistic regression model
- [ASK] Is logistic regression a linear model?
- [SHOW] what the loss curve and model hypothesis look like as we train

## Comprehension
- what's the difference in the labels of the data for a classification problem?
- what's the difference in the features of the data for a classification problem?
- in what type of classification do we predict a single label, true or false?
- if we're predicting a true of false label, what should the output represent?
    - a probability of the example being a member of the positive class
- how can we change our linear regression model to output such a probability?
- what are the useful characteristics of the sigmoid function?
- what's the equation of the sigmoid function?
- if the sigmoid layer outputs a probability, what is the special name for the input to that layer?

- can we still optimise the model parameters using gradient descent?
    - absolutely yes
- what is the feature of the sigmoid function that means we can still do this?
- what's the gradient of the logistic sigmoid?
- would you call logistic regression a linear model?
    - yes, the position of the desicion boundary varies linearly with a change in parameters
- if 

## From scratch implementation
- Group [CHALLENGE] Implement the sigmoid function with a kwarg grad, which returns the gradient if true
- [SHARE] progress so far
- Group [CHALLENGE] Implement the BCE loss function
- [SHARE] progress so far
- Group [CHALLENGE] put the whole thing together into a training loop
- [SHARE] progress so far
- Group [CHALLENGE] visualise the training curve

## Sklearn implementation
- Group [CHALLENGE] Research how to implement logistic regression in sklearn
- [SHARE] solutions
- Group [CHALLENGE] 